---
title: Clippy, I never knew you!
description: About Clippy, the MS Office Assistant, and why it was unpopular
---
Recently in a discussion, the ill-fated Microsoft Office Assistant [Clippy](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_Assistant) came up, and why it was so unpopular. I usually disabled it straight away, so I can't really tell how useful it was. As I was looking for relevant research on the topic, the Wikipedia article led me to the bachelor thesis of Luke Swartz *[http://xenon.stanford.edu/~lswartz/paperclip/paperclip.pdf](Why People Hate the Paperclip)*, where he researches possible reasons for Clippy's unpopularity. 

To summarize Swartz's findings in regards to user assistance: Clippy is one of the available characters of the Office Assistant, which has two user assistance functions:

- Proactive help system (PDF page 11): Apart from the animated characters themselves, this seems to be the main cause of Clippy's unpopularity. Proactive help features kept popping up, despite being repeatedly dismissed, which was considered as patronizing by users (PDF page 17):

    > [T]he letter-writing feature constantly asks users if they want help (creating or at least suggesting a dependent relationship), while the tips teach users a skill once, leaving them to use that skill on their own the next time (and thus increasing the users’ feeling of   control).

    Swartz best sums it all up in the following paragraph (PDF page 28):

    > The Office Assistant’s letter-writing proactive help feature, thus, breaks every relevant etiquette rule:  it ignores social conventions of when to disturb someone, it does not learn from its mistakes, it does not develop a long-term relationship, and (one might argue) it does not even provide a helpful service!  Since this feature is the most cited annoyance in the popular press, one cannot help but wonder how much better the Office Assistant would be perceived if this one feature had been fixed or eliminated before its release.

- Natural language query help (PDF page 15):
    
    > The Answer Wizard uses basic Bayesian inference [i.e. statistical probability] to guess a users’ goal, given a particular help query. This allows users to ask questions in relatively natural language, and generally provides better results than a mere 'keyword' search.

    This kind of user assistance can still be found in Office and even found its way into non-Microsoft programs, so I'd say this part of the Office Assistant has been a success.

Swartz furthermore discusses the Assistant's anthropomorphic properties and agenthood (that is, being the voice of the program), which he argues have contributed to it's unpopularity.

(Bonus points to Swartz for slipping in a Harry Potter quote -- PDF page 19.)